The Joe Rogan experience.
Tell people what you did cause it's pretty crazy.
Um, so I did, what's called free climbing.
I free climbed a route on El Capitan,
which is a 3,200 foot cliff in Yosemite national park.
And he did it in under 24 hours.
That is a long way to go. Yeah, 3,200. And.
It's something 3,200 feet is what I say.
I think it might just be like a little more than that.
When you're halfway there.
Emily Harrington becomes the first woman to scale El Capitan via its notoriously
difficult golden gate route. Why is that route more difficult?
Well, okay. So there's a router route.
I don't think it really matters. I see. Yeah. Yeah. Um,
so essentially ELCAP is this giant cliff face and there's,
there's hundreds of routes up El cap, different like pathways you can take. Um,
and right now there's currently only like 15 ways to get up at via free
climbing, free climbing, being using only your hands and feet, uh,
to ascend and a rope in case you fall. Um,
and I chose the route called golden gate,
which is more difficult than the route free rider,
which people are very familiar with because that's the route that Alex Honnold
free soloed, meaning he climbed it without a rope.
Yeah. That seems insane. So you're less than Satan to him.
Yeah. Definitely less insane than him. Alex is a dear friend of mine,
but there's some things I don't understand about him. Yeah. I don't know.
If he understands those, those things about him. No.
I mean, I have an enormous amount of respect for him, but, um, what he does is,
is truly remarkable.
Um, you bumped your head while you're doing it too. I could see the.
Yeah, you can see the scar. Um, I, that, yeah, and that's actually,
the second time I hit my head, uh, trying to, trying to do this, uh,
last year I had a really bad fall, um, wound up in the hospital,
full concussion. The whole thing this time, it was slightly less, uh,
less serious, but maybe more dramatic. Cause it,
it happened like way higher up on the wall.
How high were you up?
Um, 2,800 feet. I'd say like almost to the top. It was,
uh, it was a whole, it was very dramatic. Um, I,
so the day was actually going really well. Um,
I've been trying to do this for a few years now.
Probably I would say three years, I've been working towards this goal. Um,
and I'd actually done the route in 2015 over the course of six
days. And I really wanted to like do the same route in 24 hours.
Can I stop you there when you do it over six days? Do you sleep?
Yeah. Yeah. That's how most people climb El cap, they sleep on the wall.
It takes like five to seven days or so.
That seems more sketchy.
It's it's,
it's different because there's a lot more logistics involved, right?
Like imagine you have to like live in the vertical world for days on end.
So think about everything you do. Like from when you wake up to,
when you go to bed.
Including pooing. Oh yeah. You have to pu vertically.
Yeah. We use like, we use wag bags or like, you know,
little like plastic bags and you're like go in that bag and then you put it in
another bag and.
You put it in.
Another bag, you put it in another bag and then you like,
hang it below everything and you take it up with you and then you like,
you take it. Yeah. You don't leave it, obviously.
Stuff it in the crack up there. Is that someone going? No,
that's just someone hanging out.
That's like how you do it when you live on the wall. So you have that ledge.
Um, like the Michael Jackson song live in on the ball. Yeah,
no, that's fine. You know, I'm not familiar. It's a famous song.
Um, so you sleep in that thing. I would get zero sleep.
I don't like sleeping when I'm near the edge of my bed. I get nervous.
How, uh,
it's amazing how exhausted you are at the end of the day and how
used to the whole, like how used to it, you get,
you just adjust the human body's like humans are really remarkable in their
ability to like adapt to things. And so it's pretty cool how,
yeah, it's really scary at first, but then the more you do it,
the more you're just like, okay, well this is.
Are you when you're sleeping in that thing,
he fully is harnessed in and strapped in.
You sleep in a harness and you just usually have like a loose, um,
like rope or sling or something attached to the anchor point.
So like if you roll out, you know,
if you're one of those people that like rolls out of bed at night.
Um, yikes.
Could you imagine just the feeling of like waking up swinging,
hanging from your harness.
He's so he is actually COE. Is that sling around his waist? No,
that's just like, yeah. That's like last resort. Like that's,
that's Tommy Caldwell. He, um, while you're a psycho, he, uh,
he free climbed perhaps the hard, the hardest big wall in the world,
also on El cap called the Dawn wall. Um, and he was up there for 17 days.
So when you eat, imagine 17 days.
Look at all this stuff. That's like, he's like a homeless person up there. Yeah.
There's a lot of stuff. You know,
like the homeless people have those little camps. That is a, he's a maniac.
That's a crazy person. Look at him, checking his fingernails.
You see, he is also, he's also actually missing a finger,
which is pretty rare for an elite level rock climber.
Oh, wow. What happened in his finger? Um.
I believe it was a table saw accident, home improvement accident.
Ooh. And so he's using everything, but his index.
Yeah. He kind of climbs, um, he clinical arms like this and,
and uses the little, the nub he's yeah, definitely.
Tommy's one of my true heroes. Ultimate climbing hero.
Did you have, uh, is that as a very small click, right? Yeah.
Of Savage psychos that are willing to climb mountain faces.
Yeah. It's a relatively small group. I mean,
it's growing, climbing's definitely growing in popularity. Um,
but it definitely used to be like a little bit like a small little community.
And I think we still feel that way.
A danger in the climbing world or not a danger, a concern,
I should say of people who are seeing people
like Alex Honnold and yourself become famous and get all this
attention from these very dangerous climbs.
And they want to perhaps accelerate their progress and,
and jump right in and try to do some really risky things.
I mean, I could see that being a danger, um,
especially with like what Alex does climb without a rope.
I would still argue that what I do is a relatively safe form of climbing,
climbing the rope. When I fall, the rope catches me. It's super safe.
When I call the rope catches me, um, free climbing El cap in a day,
what would I just did? I definitely cut some corners and, um,
took more risk,
but that's an achievement that not many people have done or really strive to
do. Um, and so I think, I think for the most part,
climbing is actually a very controlled,
very safe activity and you can make it as dangerous as you want it to be.
Does that make sense?
Yes. I understand what you're saying. Um,
so if you're a person like Alex is deciding, you know, he's,
he maps these routes, he does them with ropes and then he's like, I can do this.
Yes.
And Alex, Alex is so unique in a way.
And I think anyone that watches the movie free solo,
anyone that talks to Alex understands that what he does is he it's so
well thought out and it's so well-planned,
and every single decision he makes is very calculated.
And I think that that's just,
and I think that that's a Testament to what climbing is truly about. Like,
we're not like we're not out to go feel an adrenaline rush when we go
climbing. Like if you're feeling adrenaline,
it essentially means like you messed up, like something's wrong. Um,
and climbing is very much more about like the movement and the challenge and
the mental challenge of all of it. Then,
then going out and like trying to get a thrill.
How did you get involved in this?
I started climbing when I was 10 years old. Um, I was at,
I grew up in Boulder, Colorado,
and my parents used to take me to the Boulder reservoir, this Lake,
me and my cousins. Uh.
Everyone in Boulder is a Subaru Subaru.
For my 16th birthday. It's like 70%.
Of the cars out there. Green Subaru is there.
So practically work in the snow. Yeah.
I had it for years. Um, so anyway, um,
my parents took me to the Lake and they had this little festival there and I
grew up, I'm an only child. I grew up with my two cousins who were boys.
And we were just like super with each other all the time. Like,
all I wanted to do was be better than them at like literally anything.
It didn't matter what it was. Um,
so we were at this Lake and they had a little festival with one of those tower
rock towers, you know, the ones that they let the kids climb on. And, uh,
we all tried to climb the wall and I just remember it was like, well,
I have to go to the top because they went to the top and you know,
there's like no other option. Um,
but the interesting thing that happened when I was climbing was it was just this
feeling of like, Oh, I, this is what I, this is what I'm meant to do.
Like it was like, I just felt like I belonged up there.
And I remember the feeling so vividly even now,
23 years later, um, it was like, I was scared, but I kinda liked it.
And I just really, I got down and I was like, dad,
I want to go climbing like that. That's what I want to do.
I want to quit everything else. I was a gymnast. I played soccer.
I was a ski racer. I was like, I don't want to do,
I don't want to do any of that anymore. I just want to climb.
Episodes of the Joe Rogan experience are now free on Spotify. That's right.
They're free from September 1st to December 1st,
they're going to be available everywhere, but after December 1st,
they will only be available on Spotify, but they will be free.
That includes the video. The video will also be there. It'll also be free.
That's all we're asking. Just go download Spotify much. Buh-bye.